---
layout: page
title: "Built-in Warts"
category: doc
date: 2017-02-11 0:00:00
order: 1
---

Here is a list of built-in warts under the
`org.wartremover.warts` package.

### ArrayEquals

Unlike other collections `==` on arrays and iterators checks reference equality:
```scala
List(1) == List(1) //true
Array(1) == Array(1) //false, won't compile: == is disabled, use sameElements instead
```

### Any

`Any` is the top type; it is the supertype of every other type. The
Scala compiler loves to infer `Any` as a generic type, but that is
almost always incorrect. Explicit type arguments should be used
instead.

```scala
// Won't compile: Inferred type containing Any
val any = List(1, true, "three")
```

### AnyVal

See `Any`.

```scala
// Won't compile: Inferred type containing AnyVal
val xs = List(1, true)
```

### AsInstanceOf

`asInstanceOf` is unsafe in isolation and violates parametricity when guarded by `isInstanceOf`. Refactor so that the desired type is proven statically.

```scala
// Won't compile: asInstanceOf is disabled
x.asInstanceOf[String]
```

### DefaultArguments

Scala allows methods to have default arguments, which make it hard to use methods as functions.

```scala
// Won't compile: Function has default arguments
def x(y: Int = 0)
```

### EitherProjectionPartial

`scala.util.Either.LeftProjection` and `scala.util.Either.RightProjection`
have a `get` method which will throw if the value doesn't match the
projection.  The program should be refactored to use `scala.util.Either.LeftProjection#toOption`
and `scala.util.Either.RightProjection#toOption` to explicitly handle both
the `Some` and `None` cases.

### Enumeration

Scala's `Enumeration` can cause performance problems due to its reliance on reflection. Additionally, the lack of exhaustive match checks and partial methods can lead to runtime errors. Instead of `Enumeration`, a sealed abstract class extended by case objects should be used instead.

### Equals

Scala's `Any` type provides an `==` method which is not type-safe. Using this method allows obviously incorrect code like `5 == "5"` to compile. A better version which forbids equality checks across types (which always fail) is easily defined:
```scala
@SuppressWarnings(Array("org.wartremover.warts.Equals"))
implicit final class AnyOps[A](self: A) {
   def ===(other: A): Boolean = self == other
}
```

`equals`, `eq`, `ne` are disabled as well.

### ExplicitImplicitTypes

Scala has trouble correctly resolving implicits when some of them lack explicit result types. To avoid this, all implicits should have explicit type ascriptions.

### FinalCaseClass

Scala's case classes provide a useful implementation of logicless data types. Extending a case class can break this functionality in surprising ways. This can be avoided by always making them final or sealed.

```scala
// Won't compile: case classes must be final
case class Foo()
```

### FinalVal

Value of a `final val` is inlined and can cause inconsistency during incremental compilation (see [sbt/sbt/issues/1543 ](https://github.com/sbt/sbt/issues/1543)).

```scala
file 1:
object c {
  // Won't compile: final val is disabled
  final val v = 1
}

file 2:
println(c.v)
```

### ImplicitConversion

Implicit conversions weaken type safety and always can be replaced by explicit conversions.

```scala
// Won't compile: implicit conversion is disabled
implicit def int2Array(i: Int) = Array.fill(i)("madness")
```

### ImplicitParameter

Implicit parameters as configuration often lead to confusing interfaces and can result in surprising inconsistencies.

```scala
// Won't compile: Implicit parameters are disabled
def f()(implicit s: String) = ()

// Still compiles
def f[A: Ordering](a: A, other: A) = ...
def f(a: A, other: A)(implicit ordering: Ordering[A]) = ...
```

### IsInstanceOf

`isInstanceOf` violates parametricity. Refactor so that the type is established statically.

```scala
// Won't compile: isInstanceOf is disabled
x.isInstanceOf[String]
```

### JavaConversions

The standard library provides implicits conversions to and from Java types in `scala.collection.JavaConversions`. This can make code difficult to understand and read about. The explicit conversions provided by `scala.collection.JavaConverters` should be used instead.

```scala
// Won't compile: scala.collection.JavaConversions is disabled
import scala.collection.JavaConversions._
val scalaMap: Map[String, String] = Map()
val javaMap: java.util.Map[String, String] = scalaMap
```

### JavaSerializable

`java.io.Serializable` is a common subtype to many structures, especially those
imported from Java.  For example, String is a subtype of java.io.Serializable
but not `scala.Serializable`.  The Scala compiler loves to infer
`java.io.Serializable` as a common supertype, but that is almost always
incorrect. Explicit type arguments should be used instead.

```scala
// Won't compile: Inferred type containing java.io.Serializable
object O extends Serializable
val mistake = List("foo", "bar", O /* forgot O.toString */)
```

### LeakingSealed

Descendants of a sealed type must be final or sealed. Otherwise this type can be extended in another file through its descendant.

```scala
file 1:
// Won't compile: Descendants of a sealed type must be final or sealed
sealed trait t
class c extends t

file 2:
class d extends c
```

### MutableDataStructures

The standard library provides mutable collections. Mutation breaks equational reasoning.

```scala
// Won't compile: scala.collection.mutable package is disabled
import scala.collection.mutable.ListBuffer
val mutList = ListBuffer()
```

### NonUnitStatements

Scala allows statements to return any type. Statements should only
return `Unit` (this ensures that they're really intended to be
statements).

```scala
// Won't compile: Statements must return Unit
10
false
```

When interfacing with APIs that violate this principle, one can define a function 
in the project

```scala
@specialized def discard[A](evaluateForSideEffectOnly: A): Unit = {
  val _: A = evaluateForSideEffectOnly
  () //Return unit to prevent warning due to discarding value
}

discard{ badMutateFun(foo) } // Use like this
```

### Nothing

`Nothing` is a special bottom type; it is a subtype of every other
type. The Scala compiler loves to infer `Nothing` as a generic type but
that is almost always incorrect. Explicit type arguments should be
used instead.

```scala
// Won't compile: Inferred type containing Nothing
val nothing = ???
val nothingList = List.empty
```

### Null

`null` is a special value that inhabits all reference types. It breaks
type safety.

```scala
// Won't compile: null is disabled
val s: String = null
var s2: String = _
```

### Option2Iterable

Scala inserts an implicit conversion from `Option` to `Iterable`. This can hide bugs and creates surprising situations like `Some(1) zip Some(2)` returning an `Iterable[(Int, Int)]`.

### OptionPartial

`scala.Option` has a `get` method which will throw if the value is
`None`. The program should be refactored to use `scala.Option#fold` to
explicitly handle both the `Some` and `None` cases.

### Overloading

Method overloading may lead to confusion and usually can be avoided.

```scala
// Won't compile: Overloading is disabled
class c {
  def equals(x: Int) = {}
}
```

### Product

`Product` is a type common to many structures; it is the supertype of
case classes and tuples. The Scala compiler loves to infer `Product` as
a generic type, but that is almost always incorrect. Explicit type
arguments should be used instead.

```scala
// Won't compile: Inferred type containing Product
val any = List((1, 2, 3), (1, 2))
```

### PublicInference

Type inference of public members can expose extra type information, that can break encapsulation.

```scala
class c {
  // Won't compile: Public member must have an explicit type ascription
  def f() = new c with t

  val name = "abc" // Compiles: fields initialized by string, char or boolean literals are ignored
}

class c2 extends c {
  override def f() = ... // Compiles: overridden members are ignored
}
```

### Recursion

General recursion can result in non-termination. There are various techniques, like fixed-point combinators, that allow you to extract recursion from your code. Recursion can also cause problems with stack usage. This can often be fixed with a `@tailrec` annotation (which uses constant stack) or by using a trampoline (which moves stack usage to the heap).

```scala
// Won't compile: Potentially-diverging recursion.
def diverging(i: Int): Int = if (i == 0) 0 else diverging(i + 1)
```

This particular instance can be silenced by adding `@tailrec` before `def`, making the stack safety explicit.

### Return

`return` breaks referential transparency. Refactor to terminate computations in a safe way.

```scala
// Won't compile: return is disabled
def foo(n:Int): Int = return n + 1
def foo(ns: List[Int]): Any = ns.map(n => return n + 1)
```

### Serializable

`Serializable` is a type common to many structures. The Scala compiler
loves to infer `Serializable` as a generic type, but that is almost
always incorrect. Explicit type arguments should be used instead.

```scala
// Won't compile: Inferred type containing Serializable
val any = List((1, 2, 3), (1, 2))
```

### StringPlusAny

Scala's `String` interface provides a `+` method that converts the operand to a `String` via its `toString` method. As mentioned in the documentation for the `ToString` wart, this method is unreliable and brittle.

```scala
// Won't compile: Implicit conversion to string is disabled
"foo" + {}
{} + "bar"
```

### Throw

`throw` implies partiality. Encode exceptions/errors as return
values instead using `Either`. 

### ToString

Scala creates a `toString` method automatically for all classes. Since `toString` is based on the class name, any rename can potentially introduce bugs. This is especially pernicious for case objects. `toString` should be explicitly overridden wherever used.
```scala
case object Foo { override val toString = "Foo" }
```

### IterableOps

`scala.collection.Iteable` has:

* `head`,
* `tail`,
* `init`,
* `last`,
* `reduce`,
* `reduceLeft`,
* `reduceRight`,
* `max`,
* `maxBy`,
* `min` and
* `minBy` methods,

all of which will throw if the collection is empty. The program should be refactored to use:

* `headOption`,
* `drop(1)`,
* `dropRight(1)`,
* `lastOption`,
* `reduceOption` or `fold`,
* `reduceLeftOption` or `foldLeft` and
* `reduceRightOption` or `foldRight` respectively,

to explicitly handle empty collections.

### TryPartial

`scala.util.Try` has a `get` method which will throw if the value is a
`Failure`. The program should be refactored to use `scala.util.Try#map` and `scala.util.Try#getOrElse` to
explicitly handle both the `Success` and `Failure` cases.

### Unsafe

Checks for the following warts:

* Any
* AsInstanceOf
* DefaultArguments
* EitherProjectionPartial
* IsInstanceOf
* IterableOps
* NonUnitStatements
* Null
* OptionPartial
* Product
* Return
* Serializable
* StringPlusAny
* Throw
* TryPartial
* Var

This list is built from [Unsafe.scala](https://github.com/wartremover/wartremover/blob/master/core/src/main/scala/wartremover/warts/Unsafe.scala)

### Var

Mutation breaks equational reasoning.

```scala
// Won't compile: var is disabled
var x = 100
```

### While

`while` loop usually indicates low-level code. If performance is not an issue, it can be replaced.

```scala
// Won't compile: while is disabled
while(i < 10) {
  i += 1
  ...
}
```
